BEGIN ANSWERKEY (What now follows is a tactical decision game situation, and its answers)

General Situation 
You are assigned to the 11th MEU, with BLT 2/1 as the GCE, as it deployed to Afghanistan for six months in
support of OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM. Your assigned Area of Operations is Nangarhar Province 
(capital city: Jalalabad) in the northeast sector of Afghanistan. The MEU has relieved a small coalition (NATO) 
force headquartered at an airfield southeast of Jalalabad near the town of Samarkhel. 
The terrain varies in your AO from desert to temperate and is generally mountainous. There are three provincial 
main supply routes (MSRs) that run from Jalalabad south through the Tora Bora Valley into Pakistan, from
Jalalabad east into Pakistan through the Khyber Pass, and west from Jalalabad to Kabul. There are no railroads or
major rivers but there are underground waterways that have been used for various activities from smuggling to 
insurgent activities. 
Your primary mission is to execute support and stability operations in Nangarhar Province in order to strengthen the 
legitimate government and economic development of your AO. Specific tasks include:
1) Monitor and maintain security of Afghan-Pakistan border. 
2) Monitor and maintain security in Afghanistan.
3) Interdict illegal arms trafficking.
4) Protect members of the Afghan government and provide security during elections, as necessary. 
5) Train local security forces. 
You have a coordination relationship with adjacent NATO forces and are OPCON to CENTCOM Command 
headquartered in Kabul. 
Commander’s Engagement Guidance 
I intend that all Marines under my command understand their authority and obligation to defend themselves, fellow 
service members, our allies and local civilians from any hostile act. That being said, our leaders are under a further 
obligation to understand that most engagements should be resolved in our favor using methods other than deadly
force. In many circumstances, resolving situations through de-escalation vice resorting to deadly force will increase 
our standing and authority among the local populace. Resolving situations through means other than deadly force, 
when possible, increases my ability to work with local leaders by demonstrating that while Marines can kill those 
who attack us, our allies, and those we protect, we apply selective force. This tells neutral and hostile parties that we 
are not using “full force” but are “holding back.” These neutral and hostile parties will be more inclined to talk 
because they do not know how much we are “holding back” and what our “full force” is. I intend to exploit that 
uncertainty and our standing among the local population to our advantage, but I need thinking leaders who do not
“shoot first and ask questions later” to set the stage for me to engage hostile and neutral leaders from a position of
advantage. 
Rules of Engagement 
a. These rules do not limit a Marine’s inherent authority and obligation to use all necessary means available and to 
take all appropriate actions in self-defense of the unit, yourself, and other US forces in the vicinity. 
b. Neither these rules, nor the supplemental measures activated to augment these rules, limit the inherent right and
obligation of self defense. 
c. HOSTILE FORCES: NO forces have been declared hostile. US forces are not authorized to engage forces based 
solely on uniform, appearance, or possession of weapons. 
d. HOSTILE ACTORS: You may engage persons who commit hostile acts or show hostile intent with the minimum
force necessary to counter the hostile act or demonstrated hostile intent and to protect US forces, designated non-US 
forces, non-government organizations (IRC, Doctors Without Borders, etc), and unarmed civilians. 
e. A Hostile Act is an attack or other use of force against the United States, US forces, US nationals, their property, 
designated non-US forces, foreign nationals and their property as outlined in part d. A Hostile Act is also force that 
precludes the mission of our forces including recovery of US personnel and vital US property as designed by the 
CO. Vital US property is defined as: 
• All COMSEC gear 
• All military issue weapons 
• All military issue explosives and demo
f. Hostile Intent is the threat of imminent use of force against the United States, US forces, and other forces 
designated in part d and e. It is also the threat of force to impede the mission and/or duties of US forces, including
the recovery of US personnel or vital USG property. 
g. Civilians will openly carry weapons as a sign of status. Possession and carrying weapons is not automatically 
considered a hostile act or demonstration of hostile intent. Marines who believe a civilian carrying weapon(s) 
demonstrates hostile intent are authorized to engage in accordance with Graduated Measures of Force (Section I, 
below). At no time are civilians authorized to impede military operations. 
h. Local security forces, who often do not wear uniforms, are authorized weapons required to maintain order in their 
respective areas. During initial operations, detection of local security forces are to be reported to Battalion S-3 to
include security force commander, location, and security force HQ location. At no time are local security forces
authorized to impede military operations. 
i. Use Graduated Measures of Force. When time and circumstance permit, use the following degrees of graduated 
force when responding to hostile act/intent: (1) shout verbal warnings to halt, (2) show your weapon and
demonstrate intent to use it: (3) block access or detain: (4) fire a warning shot; (5) shoot to eliminate threat. These 
Measures of Force will change if issued riot control or security force gear. 
Examples include rapidly approaching thieves with weapons at the ready to stop them from robbing a civilian.
Further example includes approaching several local military aged males carrying rifles that are impeding the 
activities of representatives from the IRC. The males offer no resistance when confronted, are detained, and
transported to HQ for questioning. If the males try to escape, military forces are authorized to pursue. Deadly force 
is only authorized if the males executes a hostile act (shooting at military forces or civilians) or demonstrates hostile 
intent (draws a weapon and begins to aim at civilians or military forces). 
i. Do not target or strike anyone who has surrendered or is out of combat due to sickness or wounds. 
j. Do not target or strike hospitals, mosques, churches, shrines, schools, museums, national monuments, and any
other historical cultural sites, civilian populated areas or buildings UNLESS the enemy is using them for military 
purposes or if necessary for your self defense. 
k. Do not target or strike infrastructure (public works, commercial communication facilities, dams), Lines of 
Communication (roads, highways, tunnels, bridges, railways) and Economic Objects (commercial storage facilities, 
pipelines) UNLESS the enemy is using them for military purposes, if necessary for self defense, or if ordered by
your commander. If you must fire on these objects, fire to disable and disrupt rather than destroy.
l. ALWAYS minimize incidental injury, loss of life and collateral damage. 
m. US Military forces are authorized to use force, to include deadly force, in the following circumstances: 
• To protect US forces and designated allies (see General Situation). 
• To protect vital US property designated by the commander (part e). 
• To protect US property not designated by the commander to be vital but is inherently dangerous (ie. NonUS military demolitions, or UXO) 
• To prevent serious offenses against others (rape, murder, etc). 
• To prevent escape of personnel who commit hostile acts. 
• When you receive a lawful order from a commander. 
• The lawful order must have: 
• Description of the person(s) to use force on.
• Reason why lawful force is authorized. 
• Example: “Engage the four men in the green truck; they attacked the marketplace.” 
n. ALL personnel MUST report suspected violations of the Law of War committed by any US, friendly, or enemy
force. Notify your chain of command, Judge advocate, IG, Chaplain, or NCIS. 

Scenario 1: Squad TDG 
 (Links to “First Contact”: Platoon TDG)
(Links to “Hostile Intent”: Squad TDG) 
(Links to “Capital Crimes”: Battalion TDG)
(Links to “Two Birds, One Stone”: Red Cell TDG)
Children Bearing Gifts 
Situation
You are the 1st Squad leader, 2d Platoon, Company F, BLT 2/1, 11th MEU. Your company has recently taken over
the area of responsibility (AOR) of Jalalabad, Afghanistan. After initial operations, organized resistance has 
ceased. However, insurgent and tribal fighters remain as active combatants. 
Your AOR is in an urban environment characterized by densely but haphazardly arranged mud brick houses of one
and two stories with flat roofs, with the occasional taller building—usually a mosque or other religiously associated
structure. The main roads are paved and two lanes wide. Side roads are also paved but only one and a half lanes 
wide. In addition, there are numerous narrow dirt alleyways only suitable for foot traffic. 
The enemy you face wears no standardized military uniform and often appears in civilian dress, uses Soviet-era 
infantry weapons (AK–47s, light machine guns, and rocket propelled grenades), and has the occasional command of
82mm mortars and 12.7mm machine guns. His main tactic is the ambush, initiated by RPG attack or improvised
explosive device. The enemy rarely stands to fight, even after such ambushes. When they do it is often the signal of 
a major engagement. S–2 (intelligence) believes such battles center around religious sites. 
The BLT has been relatively successful in matters of civil affairs and civil-military relations. They initiated a 
“weapons buy back program,” paying for each weapon turned in depending upon its lethality. Despite such gains, 
the AOR still has its share of insurgent attacks. Of the seven major clans in the AO, the BLT has secured the 
support of one smaller clan but still faces resistance from several of the larger clans in the city and surrounding area. 
Currently, your platoon is on its second patrol. After crossing the Rt 6 bridge, you enter the area controlled by the 
smaller clan that supports coalition forces. You are moving from south to north, your squad on the left flank, 2d
Squad in the center with the command element, and 3d Squad on the right. You have only your organic weapons and 
are in radio contact with the other squads and command element, though such contact is not always 100 percent due
to the urban environment.
Approximately 20 minutes after crossing the bridge, the patrol is broken by the sound of yelling and screaming kids 
coming at you from your left through an alley. You turn to see four young boys, 8 to 10 years old, each with
different types of ammunition. One boy has a belt of 12.7mm around his neck; two boys hold 82mm mortar rounds
like dead fish, from their fin-tails (you note one is fused); and to your horror, the fourth clasps a grenade, spoon in 
place, like a dead frog, but from your angle you cannot see signs of the pin. 
At this instant there is the sound of an explosion, and a large dust cloud forms to your front. “Sergeant,” yells your
1st Fire Team leader, “Watson is down hard. Perez is hit too, but maybe not as bad.” One kid drops his mortar round
and flees, followed by the kid with the 12.7mm. Then, AK–47 fire erupts from a nearby building behind you. 


Requirement
What now, Sergeant? In a time limit of 5 minutes, determine what actions you would take, what orders you would 
issue, and what reports, if any, you would make. 
TDG based on TDG 05-2 “Children Bearing Gifts” by Andrew H. Hershey printed in the Marine Corps Gazette. 
Imagery provided by Google Earth.
Issues for Consideration 
1. Who do you believe the enemy is? 
2. In terms of your mission, what is your most important task?
3. How do your actions and orders relate to that task?
4. What is the enemy trying to accomplish?
5. How will he counter your actions?
6. What are the effects of your actions and enemy reaction?
• Number of civilians wounded or killed?
• Amount of damage and destroyed property? 
7. How will the enemy exploit the effects of your actions?
• In 20 minutes? 
• By the end of the day?
• The rest of the week?
8. What can you do to counter his efforts at exploitation?
• Now?
• After you return to base?

Possible Solution to “Children Bearing Gifts” 

Yelling “Suppress that fire from the rear!” ,Squad Leader Sgt. Mueller grabbed the two children and 
shielded them with his own body. He figured they were local, and if the local clan that now supported the Marines
had kids killed, they might turn against us. Carefully, he took the possibly live grenade from the one child and held
it tight. “OK, we’re gonna close up on 1st Fire Team,” he ordered. “Move out! Run!” Still protecting the two
children, Sgt. Mueller followed his men to where 1st Fire Team had been hit. They had already moved into an
adjacent building, carrying Watson and Perez. Sgt. Mueller got on his radio to his platoon commander, called a 
CASEVAC, and said, “Sir, I recommend 2nd Squad cut left and try to cut off anyone they see running away from us. 
Then have them join up with us and we will turn back together to see if we can capture whoever was shooting at us
from behind.” His Lieutenant agreed. Hearing sounds from the civilians upstairs, Mueller pointed the two children
up the stairway and sent them to join their own people. 
Possible Solution to “Children Bearing Gifts” by GySgt Russell 
“IED Front, enemy contact to rear” 
“3rd Fire Team: Take cover and return well aimed direct fire only with positive ID. Do not advance towards 
enemy.” 
“2nd Fire Team: Secure grenade and ammo then provide assistance to 1st Fire Team.” 
“I will go to 1st Fire Team with the RTO and start MEDEVAC and contact HHQ.” 

Question-by-question solutions to "First Contact"
1. Who do you believe the enemy is? 
The enemy is the insurgents, not the children.
2. In terms of your mission, what is your most important task? 
Vague, but assume SASO
3. How do your actions and orders relate to that task? 
The squad is part of a platoon conducting presence patrols. 
4. What is the enemy trying to accomplish? 
Undermine US authority in area causing local populace to lose faith. 
5. How will he counter your actions? 
I expect the enemy to withdraw. 
6. What are the effects of your actions and enemy reaction?
• Amount of civilians wounded or killed? IED unknown 
• Amount of damage and destroyed property? Also unknown 
7. How will the enemy exploit the effects of your actions?
• In 20 minutes? 
Possible disrupt medevac or continue ambush. 
• By the end of the day? 
Blame civilian casualties on US presence. 
• The rest of the week? 
Cause fear in locals through intimidation methods. 
8. What can you do to counter his effects at exploitation?
• Now?
16
4GW TDG Manual
Draft of 9.2008
Do not indiscriminately escalate situation.
• After you return to base? 
Increase size of patrols/decrease area for platoon IOT have more available forces in immediate area.

END ANSWERKEY (answerkey now over, expect student responses to situation to follow)