BEGIN ANSWERKEY

Scenario 1 Platoon TDG

First Contact 

Situation
You are the 2d Platoon Commander, Company F, BLT 2/1, 11th MEU. Your company has recently taken over the
area of responsibility (AOR) of Jalalabad, Afghanistan. After initial operations, organized resistance has ceased. 
However, insurgent and tribal fighters remain as active combatants. 
Your AOR is in an urban environment characterized by densely but haphazardly arranged mud brick houses of one
and two stories with flat roofs, with the occasional taller building—usually a mosque or other religiously associated
structure. The main roads are paved and two lanes wide. Side roads are also paved but only one and a half lanes 
wide. In addition, there are numerous narrow dirt alleyways only suitable for foot traffic. 
The enemy you face wears no standardized military uniform and often appears in civilian dress, uses Soviet-era 
infantry weapons (AK–47s, light machine guns, and rocket propelled grenades), and has the occasional command of
82mm mortars and 12.7mm machine guns. His main tactic is the ambush, initiated by RPG attack or improvised
explosive device. The enemy rarely stands to fight, even after such ambushes. When they do it is often the signal of 
a major engagement. S–2 (intelligence) believes such battles center around religious sites. 
The BLT has been relatively successful in matters of civil affairs and civil-military relations. They initiated a 
“weapons buy back program,” paying for each weapon turned in depending upon its lethality. Despite such gains, 
the AOR still has its share of insurgent attacks. Of the seven major clans in the AO, the BLT has secured the 
support of one smaller clan but still faces resistance from several of the larger clans in the city and surrounding area. 
Currently, your platoon is on its second patrol. After crossing the Rt 6 bridge, you enter the area controlled by the 
smaller clan that supports coalition forces. You are moving from south to north, 1st squad on the left flank, you are 
with 2d Squad in the center, and 3d Squad is on the right. You have only your organic weapons and are in radio 
contact with the other squads and Battalion COC, though such contact is not always 100 percent due to the urban 
environment.
Approximately 20 minutes after crossing the bridge, you hear and see an explosion where you expect 1st Squad to be 
followed by automatic weapons fire and semi-automatic weapons fire. 2nd Squad leader executes halt in place and 
360 security. Firing continues for 30 seconds before you receive 1st Squad report; “Enemy squad with AKs, RPG,
mortar IED. Watson and Perez are down. Need CASEVAC. Break. Recommend 2nd Squad move north of my
position and cut off retreating enemy elements. Over.” 
Requirement
What now, Lieutenant? In a time limit of 5 minutes, determine what actions you would take, what orders you would 
issue, and what reports, if any, you would make. 
18
4GW TDG Manual
Draft of 9.2008
Imagery provided by Google Earth.
Issues for Consideration 
1. Who do you believe the enemy is? 
2. What do you believe your company and battalion commander’s intents are?
3. In this scenario, how do your actions and orders relate to their intents?
4. What does the enemy hope to gain from this attack?
5. How do your actions deprive the enemy of those gains?
19
4GW TDG Manual
Draft of 9.2008
6. How will the enemy counter your platoon’s actions?
7. Assume that as a result of this incident, two civilians are wounded and one home is damaged. How will the 
enemy exploit this?
• In 20 minutes? 
• By the end of the day?
• The rest of the week?
8. What can you do to counter his effects at exploitation?
• Now?
• After you return to base?
Possible Solution to “First Contact” 
“Roger, 2nd squad is moving, time now. Break, break, guidons, guidons: 1st squad is in contact with enemy 
reinforced squad vicinity of GRG XXX. Second platoon will kill or capture the enemy squad. First squad will fix
the enemy squad. Second squad will move to the vicinity GRG XXX, NE of enemy squad) IOT relieve pressure on
1st squad and prevent enemy from withdrawing. 3rd squad will move further north to the vicinity GRG XXX (200m
north of enemy) IOT prevent enemy from withdrawing. I am also going to try to have adjacent elements move to
establish blocking positions along the west side of the river. I will remain with 2nd squad.” 
I would send a brief report to the company commander describing the situation and requesting ISR over the ambush 
site and also requesting that any appropriate adjacent unit coordination be done to block enemy withdrawal across
the river to the west. 
1. Who do you believe the enemy is? 
I believe that the enemy in this case consists of hard-core insurgents due to the weaponry employed, 
sophistication and coordination of the attack and also because they did not immediately break contact once 
friendly forces began to return fire. 
2. What do you believe the company commander’s intent is?
If the company commander (or battalion CO for that matter) were standing over my shoulder right now, I 
believe that he would tell me to kill or capture the insurgents trying to kill my Marines, but that he does not
want collateral damage or civilian casualties. 
3. In this scenario, how do your actions and orders relate to that task?
My instructions to my Marines were to “kill or capture,” the insurgents. I want them to know that killing
isn’t the only option and firepower isn’t the only tool. I believe that this will help prevent my Marines from
indiscriminate use of firepower, which, while it might accomplish the short-term goal of killing the enemy, 
will probably cause a lot of collateral damage and have a long term result of weakening popular support for 
our mission with the local people. 
20
4GW TDG Manual
Draft of 9.2008
4. What does the enemy hope to gain from this attack?
I expect that the enemy has several potential goals in mind: First, to inflict casualties on our forces in an
effort to sap our resolve and will to fight; second, to demonstrate to the people of the town that they are 
powerful enough to challenge us; and third, to cause us to retaliate in typical American fashion by utilizing
massive firepower and inflicting casualties on innocent civilians and destroying their property. 
5. How do your actions deprive the enemy of those gains?
An effective response on my part will lead to killing or capturing the enemy. Such a success can be used 
with my Marines to show the results of their efforts and with the local populace to show that we can not 
only provide security for them, but that we are genuinely concerned for minimizing damage and disruption 
to their lives and livelihoods. 
6. How will the enemy counter your platoon’s actions?
I expect the enemy to break contact as soon as they learn that I am moving to surround them. Therefore,
speed is absolutely critical to my success. Due to their proximity to the river, it is also likely that they may 
try to flee across the river in an effort to prevent us from following them. 
7. Assume as a result of this incident, two civilians are wounded and one home is damaged, how will the enemy plan
to exploit this?
• In 20 minutes? 
They will spread the story that we fired indiscriminately and that we have no regard for the local people. 
• By the end of the day?
They will probably exaggerate the scale of the damage and carnage in an effort to sell their initial story of
American callousness. 
• The rest of the week?
They will probably put propaganda up on the internet or posters / graffiti on walls to rally the local populace 
against American presence. 
8. What can you do to counter his effects at exploitation?
Now?
Secure the scene, care for my casualties and local civilian casualties and take pictures of our forces doing
so. Talk to the owner of the house that is damaged and let him know that while insurgents were responsible 
for damaging his house, we would help him rebuild it and give him paperwork to take to the Civil-Military 
Operations Center (CMOC). Take pictures of the damage to his house for immediate use as part of our
information operations (IO) campaign. 
After you return to base?
Immediately work pictures into IO products and facilitate approval for immediate distribution. Get Tactical 
Psyops Team (if available) to begin creation of a message to be broadcast via loudspeaker in the streets of
the town the next morning. Try to get work going on the damaged house as soon as possible. Recommend
scheduling meeting between commander and local leaders as soon as possible to put pressure on them to 
aid in improving the local security situation and to impress upon them that insurgents are destroying their 
town.

END ANSWERKEY